---
layout: post
title:  The onus is on the interviewer
date:   2024-07-06 15:00:00
description: "Did you come prepared to host this interview?"
categories: interviewing
tags: interviewing preparation
---

This morning my wife and I were grabbing coffee at a local coffee shop. As I was waiting for our coffee near the bar and I overheard a man interviewing a woman. "So, uh, is this a job you see yourself doing for the long haul...?" he asked. Naturally, her response was an emphatic "Yes, of course!" I mean, why would she say anything else? If she had said "I'm going to give this job a year and then re-evaluate my options", would he even consider hiring her? I really started to wonder what the point of that question even was - it was a leading question that gets one answer unless the candidate is brutally honest (which is really risky if you _need_ a job) or they just don't really care at all about getting this job. Sadly, I think these types of single answer, shallow, questions are more the norm rather than the exception. I've given hundreds of interviews throughout my career in tech and vary rarely do I find an interviewer that is completely prepared to get what they need from a candidate (myself included).

Now, interviewing is _hard_. It's one of those skills that really befuddles people - probably because an interview is completely skewed by the perception of the interviewer. Perception is, by definition, subjective so you can't guarantee a consistent experience. Interviewing is qualitative and _really_ hard to measure. Measuring anything well requires a _lot_ of samples so outside of the major tech companies, most just don't interview enough to even measure anything. Even within big tech, rarely does a single interviewer actually perform enough interviews to show statistical significance between the interviewer and candidate success. And finally, _even if there is_ a single interviewer with enough interviews to be measured, odds are the interviews happened over a long time period - long enough that the interviewer has changed perspective, learned to be more (or less) effective, or just changed their opinion about what a good candidate looks like to the company.

I believe that only good way to interview is to think long and hard about the characteristics you want in a candidate and then craft the interview experience. The characteristics you want in a candidate probably need to be foundational to the company, like from company values or principles. For example, if you have a principle that suggests the company values employees that are inquisitive, and like to learn for the sake of learning, you can craft questions that try and determine if the candidate actually cares about learning.

> "Tell me about something you recently taught yourself."

It's innocuous, but if the candidate can't answer this, they either don't prioritize learning or they are just trying to find something you'll like to hear. What's important here, though, is that the interviewer is _prepared_ to dive in and find out exactly what the person learned, why they learned it, and how they learned it. If a person _really_ loves learning, you'll be able to tell. You'll dive in to find more details and the person will light up. They may come up with other examples on the fly. They may just _keep talking_ about what they learned with enthusiasm.

Say you are interviewing for an engineering role and the candidate answers with:

> "I recently taught myself how to properly cook a steak."

A bad interviewer would dismiss this answer probably by asking for something "tech related". A good interviewer will probe for deeper answers. Why steak, and why not cooking in general? How did you teach yourself to cook that steak? What does it mean for a steak to be cooked properly? What did you learn about cooking steak that was new or interesting to you? And on, and on, and on... You can really just keep going if the person _actually_ cares about learning to cook steak. The problem here is that it's on the _interviewer_ to go deeper. The interviewer needs to do all of the work. The interviewee should be able to effortlessly explain what they did in the ideal case.

What do we do about technical questions? We are hiring for an engineer, anyway. I don't think anything really changes. Start from the important characteristics of the role and work backwards. "Has 5 years experience in Java" is not a characteristic. Any engineer worth a damn can learn enough Java to be useful in under a week. Many companies default to asking about data structures but if your engineers don't need to hand-roll data structures you don't need to ask much about them. You can probe for the basic understanding of time and space complexity, or probe which data structures might be better suited for certain problem types, but you don't need to go much further than that. Instead, build questions that would apply to day 1 of the job: help me build this project in a language you don't know, help me debug this simple issue, or help me write this new basic feature.

Similarly, for more senior roles, calibrate the interview experience to their actual job. Most companies don't need senior engineers that can build complex, scalable, systems that serve millions of requests - they just need someone that can mentor other engineers and someone that has enough experience to identify which tech to use when solving a business problem. The problem with these characteristics, though, is that they take time and require interviewers to think long and hard about what they really want to ask... and I think that's the problem. It's _really hard_ to build a sophisticated, technical, question that you can fit into an hour or so.

Interviewing is tough, so it's no surprise that most companies just... suck at it. I highly doubt the interview experience is a priority at most companies, even though it's one of the _few_ processes that really matters in the long run. It takes time, thought, and care to really craft something _great_ in the interview process but the time investment will be well worth the return. My advice to would-be interviewers is to be prepared - do the best you can for your company and the candidate. You'll fall on your face from time to time, but if you _really care_, the process will get better as you continue to hone in on perfection. Plus, if you do a great job, you'll get to work with great people and, honestly, nothing makes a job more worthwhile than great coworkers.
